Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470
DOI 10.3758/s13428-016-0715-3

Introducing the Open Affective Standardized Image Set (OASIS)
Benedek Kurdi 1 & Shayn Lozano 1 & Mahzarin R. Banaji 1

Published online: 23 February 2016
# Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2016

Abstract We introduce the Open Affective Standardized
Image Set (OASIS), an open-access online stimulus set containing 900 color images depicting a broad spectrum of
themes, including humans, animals, objects, and scenes, along
with normative ratings on two affective dimensions—valence
(i.e., the degree of positive or negative affective response that
the image evokes) and arousal (i.e., the intensity of the affective response that the image evokes). The OASIS images were
collected from online sources, and valence and arousal ratings
were obtained in an online study (total N = 822). The valence
and arousal ratings covered much of the circumplex space and
were highly reliable and consistent across gender groups.
OASIS has four advantages: (a) the stimulus set contains a
large number of images in four categories; (b) the data were
collected in 2015, and thus OASIS features more current images and reflects more current ratings of valence and arousal
than do existing stimulus sets; (c) the OASIS database affords
users the ability to interactively explore images by category
and ratings; and, most critically, (d) OASIS allows for free use
of the images in online and offline research studies, as they are
not subject to the copyright restrictions that apply to the
International Affective Picture System. The OASIS images,
along with normative valence and arousal ratings, are available for download from www.benedekkurdi.com/#oasis or
https://db.tt/yYTZYCga.

* Mahzarin R. Banaji
mahzarin_banaji@harvard.edu

1

Department of Psychology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Keywords Affect ratings . Arousal ratings . Circumplex
model . Emotion . Images . Norms . Online research .
Open-access . Valence ratings
Images represent both the physical and social worlds. Using a
few thousand pixels, they can depict an unlimited array of
people, objects, and scenes and can evoke a range of affective
responses, such as happiness, excitement, contentment, sadness, anger, or disgust. Many studies in the behavioral and
brain sciences require images that elicit varied emotions associated with social and nonsocial phenomena (Quigley,
Lindquist, & Barrett, 2014). To facilitate such research, the
Center for the Study of Emotion and Attention developed
the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang,
Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008), an internationally available normative set of emotional stimuli. The latest version of the IAPS
contains 1,195 color photographs that have been assigned
normative ratings on three dimensions—valence, arousal,
and dominance.1 Since its inception, the IAPS has been widely used in psychological, psychophysiological, and neuroscience research covering a broad array of topics, including affective processing in children (Hajcak & Dennis, 2009), psychophysiological reactions to sleep-related images in insomnia (Baglioni et al., 2010), fear conditioning (Wessa & Flor,
2007), the emotional modulation of attention (Cohen, Henik,
& Mor, 2011), moral cognition (Moll, Zahn, de OliveiraSouza, Krueger, & Grafman, 2005), and implicit attitudes
(Payne, Cheng, Govorun, & Stewart, 2005). To date, several
thousand research studies have been published using IAPS
images, making the IAPS one of the most frequently used
stimulus sets in behavioral research today. Its contribution to
advancing research cannot be overstated.
1

Categorical affective ratings for the IAPS images are also available
(Mikels et al., 2005).

458

However, IAPS was produced in pre-Internet research
times, and as such the images are subject to copyright restrictions that prohibit their use in online research studies. In fact,
the copyright agreement accompanying the IAPS clearly stipulates that users are not allowed Bto place them [i.e., IAPS
images] on any internet or computer-accessible websites^
[sic]. Given the increased reliance on online samples in behavioral research, this restriction poses an unnecessary constraint
on research progress. The Internet has massively changed how
psychological research is being conducted, both by expanding
the range of phenomena under study and by providing new
and more robust tools for implementing projects. Data collection has become faster, less expensive, and more efficient,
because researchers can easily post research studies online
for data collection from large and diverse pools of participants
without geographic and other boundaries (Berinsky, Huber, &
Lenz, 2012; Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling, 2011; Kraut et
al., 2004; Mason & Suri, 2012; Paolacci, Chandler, &
Ipeirotis, 2010), with the exception of digital literacy. It is
hardly a surprise, then, that hundreds of behavioral studies
are being conducted online at any given time—a number that
increases daily (Krantz, 2015). For instance, Project Implicit’s
data collection and educational website on topics of implicit
group attitudes and beliefs (http://implicit.harvard.edu) has
been in use since 1998 and has gathered data from over 15
million tests. However, the issues addressed by online research
studies are not restricted to implicit social bias (Nosek, Banaji,
& Greenwald, 2002); they range from voters’ competence at
assessing incumbent politicians (Huber, Hill, & Lenz, 2012) to
life satisfaction (Peterson, Park, & Seligman, 2005), from
emotion in decision making (Seo & Barrett, 2007) to personality (Buchanan, Johnson, & Goldberg, 2005), and from compulsive hoarding (Frost, Tolin, Steketee, Fitch, & SelboBruns, 2009) to the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases
(Pequegnat et al., 2007).
As the volume and complexity of online research increases,
a greater number of behavioral researchers require access to
pretested images that vary in affective valence and intensity.
Although several general and specialized visual stimulus sets
are available to facilitate behavioral research on emotion, such
as the IAPS (Lang et al., 2008), the Karolinska Directed
Emotional Faces (Lundqvist, Flykt, & Öhman, 1998), and
the Geneva Affective Picture Database (GAPED; DanGlauser & Scherer, 2011), there is a lack of standardized,
open-access, and widely available stimulus sets with corresponding normative affective ratings. Therefore, as of now,
researchers conducting online studies are forced to create visual stimuli in an ad hoc manner, which is time-consuming,
inefficient, and limits the comparability and generalizability of
research findings.
The goal of the present project was to create an open-access
standardized stimulus set containing affective images,
which—similarly to the IAPS—includes a broad spectrum

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

of themes. We sought to create an independent novel stimulus
set containing high-quality contemporaneous images with the
broadest possible coverage of circumplex space, rather than
any direct content mapping to IAPS images. We collected 900
images depicting a wide range of categories, including
humans, animals, scenes, and objects, from open-access online sources, and recruited a diverse sample of participants for
a norming study to gauge their affective responses to the images. Although affective responses can be conceptualized and
measured in a number of different ways, we relied on the
circumplex model of affect (Russell, 1980) and collected
self-reported subjective ratings on valence (i.e., the positivity
or negativity of the affective response) and arousal (i.e., the
level of excitement that an observer experiences).

Method
Participants
The participants were recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to Brate images of everyday objects
and scenes^ in exchange for $0.75. MTurk offers a participant
pool that is more diverse than undergraduate samples
(Berinsky et al., 2012; Buhrmester et al., 2011), such as the
sample that provided normative ratings for the IAPS images
(Lang et al., 2008). Moreover, it has been demonstrated repeatedly that studies conducted via MTurk offer valid and
reliable data whose quality is comparable to that of data collected in lab studies (Buhrmester et al., 2011; Mason & Suri,
2012; Paolacci et al., 2010; Rand, 2012). To make sure that
participants were sufficiently attentive and motivated, we restricted participation to workers with an approval rate of at
least 90 % on previous human intelligence tasks (HITs) completed on MTurk, and at least 50 HITs completed. Moreover,
to prevent intercultural differences in terms of valence and
arousal judgments or response styles from contaminating the
results, the HIT was displayed only to workers from the
United States. Potential participants received a disclaimer that
they might find some of the images displayed in the study
disturbing, due to Bsexually explicit, violent, or traumatic^
content. The original target number for participants was 800;
however, because some participants failed to submit their HIT
on Amazon MTurk after completing the study, we ended up
with usable data from 822 participants. On average, it took
participants 25.13 min (SD = 6.68) to complete the study.
The participants exhibited considerable variability in terms
of age, gender, geographic location, and socioeconomic background. Participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 74 years, with a
mean of 36.63 years (SD = 11.91). With 420 female and 398
male participants, the gender distribution was balanced.
Participants’ ideological self-placement, race, highest level
of education, and household income also varied considerably

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

(see Fig. 1), although, relative to the national average, liberal,
White, highly educated, and high-income participants were
overrepresented in our sample, as they are in most online
research studies (Berinsky et al., 2012). Detailed demographic
data have not been reported for the participants who rated the
original IAPS images. However, given that the IAPS images
were rated exclusively by introductory psychology students
(Lang et al., 2008), one can reasonably assume that the sample
used in the present study was considerably more diverse in
terms of age and socioeconomic background.
Materials
The 900 images included in the study were obtained from
a variety of online sources, most notably Pixabay (https://
pixabay.com/en/; N = 646) and Wikipedia (https://www.
wikipedia.org; N = 172). The images were found using
Google Images (https://images.google.com). We
collected a broad range of images that we expected to
cover the largest possible area in circumplex space. The
image search was restricted to images labeled as being
available for reuse with modification, thus ensuring that
the images could be edited and redistributed without any
restrictions and free of charge. We standardized the size of
the images by scaling and/or cropping them to 500 ×
400 pixels. The images were then randomly assigned to
four lists containing 225 images each.
Prior to the study, each image was placed into one of four
mutually exclusive categories—animals, objects, people, and
scenes. The images in the animal category (N = 134) depict
various animals, including dogs, snakes, insects, birds, spiders, sharks, lions, monkeys, and cats. The images in the
objects category (N = 200) depict a wide range of objects,
including human-made objects such as fences, jewelry, cars,
bottles, and balls of yarn, and natural objects such as leaves,
rocks, pebbles, and flowers. The images in the people category (N = 346) depict humans alone, in dyads, and in groups
in various situations of daily life. The images in the scenes
category (N = 220) depict urban and rural spaces, as well as
weather phenomena such as lightning or earthquakes. It
should be noted that the category assignments were made
by the first and second authors and had no basis in empirical
measurement. They serve merely to facilitate the use of the
stimulus set.
Procedure
Prestudy We considered whether to instruct participants to
focus on the valence and intensity of each image or to ask
about the feelings that each image evoked in them. We
thus created two sets of instructions: image-focused instructions asking participants to indicate the level of valence or arousal intrinsic to each image, and internal

459

state-focused instructions asking participants to indicate
the level of valence and arousal that each image has
evoked in them2 (Quigley et al., 2014). To determine
whether these two sets of instructions led to different assessments, and if so, in what way, we conducted a
prestudy with 184 participants, also recruited from
Amazon MTurk.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
sets of instructions (see Appendixes 1 and 2) and to either
the valence or the arousal dimension. We tested the effects
of the instruction manipulation on the valence and arousal
ratings by fitting a mixed-effects linear regression to the
data, with random intercepts for images and participants,
and a fixed effect for instruction focus (image-focused vs.
internal state-focused). No significant effect of instruction
focus was found, t(90) = 0.789, p = .432, suggesting that
participants rated the images similarly irrespective of
whether they had been assigned to the image-focused or
the internal state-focused instruction condition. Therefore,
in the main study, we dropped this manipulation and used
only the image-focused instructions.
Main study The 900 images were randomly assigned to four
lists of 225 images each. Each list was tested in a separate
study. Four lists were created in order to prevent participant
fatigue. Using a mixed-effects model including random effects for participants and images and a fixed effect for list,
we found that ratings did not differ across the lists, χ2(3) =
1.01, p = .798. Therefore, all results are reported by collapsing
across lists. To avoid contamination between the two dimensions of valence and arousal (Bishop, Oldendick, &
Tuchfarber, 1984; Lau, Sears, & Jessor, 1990; Schuman,
Kalton, & Ludwig, 1983; Wilcox & Wlezien, 1993), each
participant was randomly assigned to rate the images on only
the valence or only the arousal dimension. First, participants
received a general description of the study (Screen 1) and
detailed instructions on the meaning of the dimension that
they would be asked to rate (Screen 2; for the full set of
instructions, see Appendix 1). We expected that the meaning
of the valence dimension might be more intuitively clear to
participants than the meaning of the arousal dimension. To
prevent the valence dimension from interfering with judgments of arousal, the participants in the arousal condition received an additional set of instructions (Screen 3) explaining
the difference between valence and arousal and the orthogonal
nature of the two dimensions.
After reading the instructions, participants were presented
with the 225 images in an individually randomized order and
were asked to rate the images using a 7-point Likert scale.
2
The IAPS is based on internal state-focused instructions. For instance,
the arousal instructions say, B[a]t one extreme of the scale you felt stimulated, excited, frenzied, jittery, wide-awake, aroused^ (Lang et al., 2008).

460

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

Fig. 1 Distributions of some key demographic variables (race, ideological self-placement, highest educational attainment, and annual household
income) in the sample

Even though the IAPS images were originally normed using a
so-called Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM; Hodes, Cook, &
Lang, 1985) rather than a verbal scale, it has been shown that,
at least for the valence and arousal dimensions assessed in the
present study, SAM and corresponding verbal scales are very
highly correlated (Bradley & Lang, 1994). Each image was
displayed in a size of 500 × 400 pixels on a separate screen,
and the rating scale was placed below the image. For the valence dimension, the word Valence was displayed above the
rating scale and the points of the scale were labeled as Very
negative, Moderately negative, Somewhat negative, Neutral,
Somewhat positive, Moderately positive, and Very positive.
For the arousal dimension, the word Arousal was displayed
above the rating scale and the points of the scale were labeled
as Very low, Moderately low, Somewhat low, Neither low nor
high, Somewhat high, Moderately high, and Very high.
Valence and arousal are technical terms; however, they
were used as labels because their meanings were clearly explained to participants in the instructions and we did not want
to impose any new, potentially misleading, labels on the
scales. After rating each image, participants clicked a button
to proceed to the next screen. The survey was set up to proceed in a forward only direction; that is, participants were not
allowed to return to previous screens.
After providing ratings for all 225 images, participants
were asked to complete a standard demographic questionnaire
including items on gender, age, ethnicity, race, ideological
self-placement, annual household income, highest educational
attainment, current ZIP code, and ZIP code where they had

lived longest. On the following screen, participants received a
6-digit code with which they were able to claim compensation
on Amazon MTurk. On the last screen of the study, participants were thanked and debriefed.

Results
Univariate distributions
The number of valence ratings provided for each image
ranged from 101 to 108, with a mean of 103.25 ratings (SD
= 2.77) per image. The number of arousal ratings provided for
each image ranged from 100 to 104, with a mean of 102.23
ratings (SD = 1.30) per image.
The mean valence and arousal ratings and the corresponding standard deviations were calculated for each image. The
distribution of the imagewise means and standard deviations
is shown in Fig. 2. Valence ratings ranged from 1.11 to 6.49,
showing good usage of the entire range of the scale. The mean
valence rating was 4.33, somewhat above the theoretical midpoint of the scale, and the median valence standard deviation
was 1.09. Overall, the distribution of valence ratings was fairly uniform, although a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test for uniformity did not formally confirm this impression, D = 0.17, p <
.001. Arousal ratings ranged from 1.69 to 5.72, and thus the
range of arousal ratings was more restricted than the range of
valence ratings. The mean arousal rating was 3.67, somewhat
below the theoretical midpoint of the scale, and the median

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

461

Fig. 2 Univariate distributions of imagewise mean valence and arousal ratings (top row) and distributions of imagewise valence and arousal standard
deviations (bottom row)

arousal standard deviation was 1.68 (and thus higher than that
for valence ratings). From visual inspection, the distribution of
arousal ratings seemed fairly normal, although a
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test for normality did not formally
confirm this impression, D = 0.96, p < .001.
The soundness of our measures is underscored by the striking visual similarity between the valence and arousal distributions in the present study and in the IAPS (Lang et al., 2008).
In fact, submitting standardized valence and arousal ratings
from both datasets to Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests confirmed
that the valence scores had been sampled from the same underlying distributions across both studies, D = 0.04, p = .257,
and that the arousal scores had been sampled from similar, if
not exactly the same, distributions, D = 0.07, p = .023.
Moreover, in the IAPS, just as in this study, the range of
arousal ratings (from 1.72 to 7.35 out of the theoretically possible range of 1 to 9) was smaller than the range of valence
ratings (from 1.31 to 8.34), and the median arousal standard
deviation (2.15) was higher than the median valence standard
deviation (1.57).
We evaluated the face validity of these valence and arousal
ratings by probing which images received the most highly
positive and negative valence ratings and the highest and lowest arousal ratings, and which images had the highest and
lowest valence and arousal standard deviations, indicating
low and high levels of agreement, respectively. The most positive valence rating (M = 6.49, SD = 0.78) was obtained for

image I256, which depicts a young puppy in a polka-dotted
coffee pot, and the most negative valence rating was obtained
for image I496 (M = 1.11, SD = 0.42), which depicts an
emaciated person in a concentration camp. Image I679, which
depicts a rooftop, had the lowest valence standard deviation
(0.34, M = 4.06), and image I540, which depicts heterosexual
oral intercourse, had the highest valence standard deviation
(2.03, M = 4.84).
The highest arousal rating (M = 5.72, SD = 1.67) was
obtained for image I537, which depicts heterosexual intercourse, and the lowest arousal rating (M = 1.69, SD = 1.24)
was obtained for image I860, which depicts a concrete wall.
Image I597, which depicts a pile of blank paper, had the lowest arousal standard deviation (1.19, M = 1.82), and image
I208, which depicts dead bodies lying on the ground, had
the highest arousal standard deviation (2.48, M = 4.51).
These values demonstrate face validity and confirm the soundness of our valence and arousal measures.
Reliability
Because every participant rated only a subset of the images,
we calculated interrater reliabilities for the valence and arousal
scales using a resampling method. For each dimension, we
randomly generated 1,000 split halves, calculated the correlation between the two halves, and took the mean of the correlation distribution as our reliability measure. For the valence

462

dimension, the interrater reliability was excellent, Rval = .984
(SD = 0.002, range: Rmin = .974 and Rmax = .989). For the
arousal dimension, the interrater reliability was somewhat
lower but still outstanding, Raro = .929 (SD = 0.015, range:
Rmin = .833 and Rmax = .958).
We hypothesized that in comparison to the valence scale, the
relatively lower reliability of the arousal scale might have been
due to differences in judgments between men and women. In
other words, the ratings might have been more consistent within than across gender groups. To test this possibility, we calculated separate reliability measures for our male and female participants. For the female participants, we obtained Raro/w = .930
(SD = 0.014, range: Rmin = .864 and Rmax = .958), and for the
male participants, we obtained Raro/m = .964 (SD = 0.015,
range: Rmin = .862 and Rmax = .957). However, interrater reliability depends not only on the internal consistency of a measure but also on the sample size. To adjust for the fact that the
female and male subsamples were smaller than the overall
sample, we used the Spearman–Brown prophecy formula3 to
calculate the expected reliability of the measure if the sizes of
the female and male subsamples were equal to that of the overall sample. For female participants, we obtained an adjusted
reliability score of R aro/w = .961, and for male participants,
we obtained an adjusted reliability score of R aro/m = .964, each
of which is higher than the original reliability estimate of Raro =
.929. The fact that the interrater reliabilities for each gender
exceeded the interrater reliability for the sample as a whole
suggests that, as hypothesized, the relatively lower reliability
of the arousal scale was in part due to a lack of internal consistency across, rather than within, gender groups.
Relationship between means and standard deviations
In the next step, we investigated the relationship between the
imagewise means and imagewise standard deviations for
each of the two affective dimensions, by fitting linear, quadratic, and cubic regressions to the data with the imagewise
means as predictors and the imagewise standard deviations
as criterion variables.
For the valence dimension, the scatterplot (see Fig. 3, left
pane) shows an M-shaped relationship between the means and
standard deviations. In other words, the standard deviations
were lowest at both ends and at the midpoint of the valence
scale. This kind of relationship seems quite reasonable, considering that the valence scale used in the study had three
meaningful anchor points—its low end (highly negative images), its midpoint (completely neutral images), and its high
end (highly positive images). The visual impression of an Mshaped relationship was further confirmed by the fact that a
cubic regression provided the best fit to the data, although the
tt
ρKK ¼ 1þðKρ
K−1Þρtt , where ρtt is the interrater reliability of the measure
given the current sample size, and K is the lengthening factor.

3

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

relationship between the valence means and standard deviations still remained fairly weak, R2 = .036. Participants exhibited fairly high levels of agreement, overall. The weak cubic
trend might have nevertheless have arisen because levels of
agreement were especially high—and thus standard deviations were especially low—for some images at both extremes
and at the midpoint of the valence scale.
For the arousal dimension, the scatterplot (see Fig. 3, right
pane) displays an inverted U-shaped relationship between the
means and standard deviations. In other words, standard deviations were lowest at the low end of the arousal scale, became higher as the mean increased, and leveled off again at the
very high end of the scale. This kind of relationship seems
quite reasonable, considering that the arousal scale used in the
study did not have a meaningful midpoint. Moreover, the
highest arousal ratings were typically obtained for images
depicting nudity, which (a) were rated differently by men
and women and (b) might have given rise to socially desirable
responding (Crowne & Marlowe, 1960; Paulhus, 1984) for
some participants, but not for others. The visual impression
of an inverted U-shaped relationship was further confirmed by
the fact that a quadratic regression provided the best fit to the
data, with a fairly strong relationship between the arousal
means and standard deviations, R2 = .411.4
Relationship between valence and arousal
The relationship between the valence and arousal ratings
is shown in Fig. 4. As expected, we found no significant
linear relationship between the valence and arousal ratings, Pearson’s r = −.06 [−.12; .01], t(898) = −1.74, p =
.081.5 In addition to the lack of a strong correlation, the
fact that all four quadrants of the circumplex space contain a fair number of images (positive–high arousal, N =
197; positive–low arousal, N = 392; negative–high arousal, N = 145; and negative–low arousal, N = 166) provides
further evidence for a fairly balanced bivariate distribution
of valence and arousal ratings. However, as with the
IAPS, the valence and arousal ratings show a
boomerang-shaped bivariate distribution, such that arousal
4
These results are highly similar to the corresponding results from the
IAPS. In the IAPS, just as in the present study, we found an M-shaped
relationship between the valence means and standard deviations, with a
cubic regression providing the best fit to the data, R2 = .048. The same
applied to the relationship between the arousal means and standard deviations, with an inverted U-shaped relationship between the two and a
quadratic regression providing the best fit to the data, R2 = .188.
5
The correlation between valence and arousal ratings is similarly negative, but stronger and statistically significant, for the IAPS images, r =
−.29 [−0.34; −0.24], t(1192) = −10.43, p < .001. The fact that both dimensions are significantly correlated in the IAPS might have to do with
some participants misinterpreting the SAM as representing neutral arousal to high arousal, rather than, as intended, low to high arousal (Kuppens,
Tuerlinckx, Russell, & Barrett, 2013).

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

463

Fig. 3 (Left) Relationship between imagewise valence means and imagewise valence standard deviations, with the best-fitting cubic regression line.
(Right) Relationship between imagewise arousal means and imagewise arousal standard deviations, with the best-fitting quadratic regression line

ratings are highest at the most positive and most negative
levels of valence (on the relationship between valence and
arousal more generally, see Kuppens et al., 2013; Lang,
1995). Thus, in the future we plan to add further images
to OASIS to correct for the relative undersampling of the
low-arousal positive and low-arousal negative segments
of the circumplex space. At the same time, we note that,
unlike IAPS, OASIS contains a reasonable number of
mid-arousal and high-arousal neutral images.

Figure 5 illustrates the relationship between valence and
arousal ratings by image categories. Descriptively, the image
categories modulated univariate valence and arousal distributions. At 4.45, animals had the highest mean valence rating
(SD = 1.24), followed by people (M = 4.38, SD = 1.20),
scenes (M = 4.25, SD = 1.44), and objects (M = 4.22, SD =
0.97). On the arousal dimension, animals were also rated as
most highly arousing (M = 4.00, SD = 0.55), followed by
people (M = 3.89, SD = 0.67), scenes (M = 3.88, SD =
0.78), and objects (M = 2.84, SD = 0.79). The correlation
between valence and arousal was strongest for images
depicting animals, r = −.27 [−.42; −.11], t(132) = −3.23, p =
.002; followed by objects, r = −.15 [−.28; −.01], t(198) =
−2.07, p = .039; scenes, r = −.11 [−.24; −.02], t(218) =
−1.62, p = .106; and people, r = −.01 [−.11; .09], t(344) =
−0.23, p = .817. However, because the assignment of category
labels was not based on any rigorous empirical classification
and we did not seek to obtain an exhaustive or representative
sample of images from each category, these values should
merely be understood as characterizing this particular stimulus
set rather than any general psychological phenomenon.
Gender differences

Fig. 4 Image ratings in circumplex space, with valence (measured on a
1–7 Likert scale) on the x-axis and arousal (also measured on a 1–7 Likert
scale) on the y-axis

On the basis of previous research on gender differences in
affective processing (Bellezza, Greenwald, & Banaji, 1986;
Bradley, Codispoti, Sabatinelli, & Lang, 2001; Sabatinelli,
Flaisch, Bradley, Fitzsimmons, & Lang, 2004; Wrase et al.,
2003), and involving the IAPS in particular (Lang et al.,
2008), we expected that participant gender might modulate
the valence and arousal ratings. Therefore, we calculated

464

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

women rated both dimensions similarly. However, to enable
researchers to select pictures that either differentiate or do not
differentiate on the basis of gender, we provide valence and
arousal ratings modulated by participant gender.
Effects of demographic variables

Fig. 5 Image ratings in circumplex space, with valence (measured on a
1–7 Likert scale) on the x-axis and arousal (also measured on a 1–7 Likert
scale) on the y-axis. The colors correspond to different image categories

mean valence and arousal ratings for each image, broken
down by participant gender. The mean valence ratings provided by women were almost perfectly correlated with the mean
valence ratings provided by men, r = .95 [.95; .96], t(898) =
92.62, p < .001. On the arousal dimension, the mean ratings
provided by women were also highly, although not perfectly,
correlated with the mean ratings provided by men, r = .83 [.81;
.85], t(898) = 43.93, p < .001. These correlations are significantly different from each other, z = 14.21, p < .001. Even
though the correlations across genders were high, we still
found considerable gender differences for some images, especially in the arousal ratings of sexually explicit images.
Therefore, we recalculated the correlation between women
and men after removing the arousal ratings for these images
from the data. This resulted in a somewhat higher correlation,
r = .88 [.87; .90], t(839) = 54.50, p < .001. The improvement
was statistically significant, z = 4.44, p < .001.
Even though we obtained high correlations between the
valence and arousal ratings provided by men and women,
we also wanted to test for potential gender differences in terms
of the mean levels of valence and arousal ratings assigned to
the images. We investigated such gender effects by fitting a
mixed-effects linear model to the data with random intercepts
for images and participants, and an interaction between participant gender (male vs. female) and rating dimension (valence vs. arousal). We obtained a significant main effect for
dimension, t(817.1) = 10.95, p < .001, but no significant gender effect, t(819.2) = 0.21, p = .836, and no interaction,
t(817.8) = 1.46, p = .143. This confirms that after controlling
for image-specific and participant-specific variation, men and

Earlier findings suggested that younger and older adults might
differ from each other in terms of their valence and arousal
ratings of IAPS images (Grühn & Scheibe, 2008). After applying a median split to the continuous age variable, we found
very high correlations between both the valence ratings, r =
.98 [.97; .98], t(898) = 133.03, p < .001, and the arousal
ratings, r = .92 [.91; .93], t(898) = 72.67, p < .001, provided
by younger and older participants. Follow-up analyses indicated that the relatively lower correlation in arousal ratings
was primarily due to differences in how younger and older
participants rated the sexually explicit images. On average,
older participants tended to assign somewhat higher arousal
ratings (M = 4.51, SD = 0.71) to these images than did younger participants (M = 4.40, SD = 0.76), t(58) = 2.58, p = .012.
This apparent inconsistency between our study and the study
conducted by Grühn and Scheibe (2008) might be due to
differences in the participant pools. Whereas that study focused specifically on age differences, and thus used two distinct groups of participants (younger adults, 18–31 years;
older adults, 63–77 years), we did not restrict participation
to any specific age group.
We obtained similarly high split-half correlations after dividing our sample into low-income and high-income groups.
On the valence dimension, the ratings provided by lowincome and high-income participants were correlated at r =
.96 [.95; .96], t(898) = 102.99, p < .001, and on the arousal
dimension, they correlated at r = .95 [.94; .95], t(898) = 88.04,
p < .001. Thus, income did not seem to significantly modulate
the valence and arousal ratings in the present study.
We also probed whether ideological self-placement affected the mean valence and arousal ratings assigned to the
OASIS images. After dichotomizing the ideology variable
and excluding participants who identified as ideologically
neutral, we found reasonably high correlations between both
the valence ratings, r = .87 [.85; .88], t(898) = 52.32, p < .001,
and the arousal ratings, r = .78 [.75; .80], t(898) = 37.32, p <
.001, provided by liberal and conservative participants.
Follow-up analyses revealed that the valence and arousal ratings provided by liberals and conservatives were especially
inconsistent for a few select themes. Liberal participants
tended to assign more positive valence ratings than conservative participants to images depicting nudity and sexuality,
whereas the conservative participants tended to assign more
positive valence ratings than liberal participants to images
depicting guns, soldiers, and police officers. Similarly, conservatives tended to rate images depicting guns, war scenes, and

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

police officers as more arousing than did liberals, whereas
liberals tended to rate sexually explicit images as more arousing than did conservatives. It should be noted, however, that
our sample was ideologically unbalanced, containing more
liberal (N = 396) than conservative (N = 220) participants,
χ2(1) = 50.29, p < .001.
The dichotomization of continuous variables is useful for
ease of understanding, but it produces a loss of power and
can lead to spurious results (Altman & Royston, 2006;
MacCallum, Zhang, Preacher, & Rucker, 2002). Therefore,
we repeated our analyses using age and ideological selfplacement as continuous variables. In the first step, we calculated correlations between the ratings provided by each
pair of participants in the study (separately for valence and
arousal, because the groups of participants providing ratings
for each dimension were nonoverlapping). In the second
step, we calculated difference scores for each pair of participants in terms of age and ideology. And, finally, we calculated whether pairwise differences in terms of age or ideology predicted levels of agreement. The mean pairwise correlation between participants was r = .41 (SD = .25, median
= .45). As indicated by the higher reliability values for the
valence dimension obtained above, the mean pairwise correlation was significantly higher for the valence dimension, r
= .57 (SD = .16, median = .60), than for the arousal dimension, r = .24 (SD = 0.22, median = .25), z = 41.39, p < .001.
Crucially, however, both the relationship between age differences and the pairwise correlations, r = .07, and the relationship between ideological distance and the pairwise correlations, r = −.04, remained weak, almost nonexistent, suggesting that neither age nor ideology had any moderating effect
on our valence and arousal ratings.

Discussion
We collected and normed images online in order to create the
OASIS dataset. OASIS contains 900 open-access images
depicting a variety of themes that have been rated by a fairly
diverse sample of American adults on two affective dimensions, valence (i.e., the positivity or negativity of an image)
and arousal (i.e., the intensity of the affective response that the
image evokes). Similar to IAPS, the mean ratings on the valence dimension formed a nearly uniform distribution, whereas the mean ratings on the arousal dimension formed a nearly
normal distribution. Also in line with the IAPS, the variability
of the valence ratings was higher than the variability of the
arousal ratings. The images with the most negative and positive valence and the highest and lowest arousal ratings suggest
that the ratings obtained for the OASIS images have good face
validity. The interrater reliability of the valence dimension
was excellent, whereas the interrater reliability of the arousal
dimension was somewhat lower but still outstanding.

465

Also in line with the IAPS, the valence and arousal dimensions had a negative linear relationship with each other, although in the present stimulus set this relationship was not
statistically significant. Moreover, the OASIS images showed
the same boomerang-shaped distribution characterizing the
IAPS images, such that extremely positive and extremely negative images tended to have the highest arousal ratings. The
mean valence ratings had an M-shaped cubic relationship with
valence standard deviations, such that standard deviations
were lower at both extremes and at the midpoint of the valence
scale. This relationship is most probably due to the fact that
the valence scale has three meaningful anchor points (both
extremes and the midpoint). The relationship between the
mean arousal ratings and arousal standard deviations exhibited a quadratic trend, with standard deviations being higher
toward the high end of the scale, due to gender differences
in terms of assigning arousal ratings to the sexually explicit
images, and possibly due to socially desirable responding that
affected some participants more than others. The proclivity for
socially desirable responding is a fairly stable personality trait
(Furnham, 1986), and it seems reasonable to assume that a
person high in socially desirable responding might be motivated to report relatively low arousal ratings for sexually
arousing images.
We also investigated the effects of gender and certain demographic variables. We showed that the relatively low
interrater reliability of the arousal ratings was due to a lack
of homogeneity across genders. However, the reliability of the
arousal dimension came close to that of the valence dimension
once gender differences were controlled for. Moreover, the
imagewise mean valence ratings were almost perfectly correlated across genders, whereas the correlation between women
and men was somewhat lower for the arousal dimension. The
correlation became higher after the images with sexually explicit content were removed from consideration. The effects of
demographic variables, including age, income, and ideological self-placement, were negligible, although some systematic
differences emerged between liberals and conservatives in rating images involving sexuality and violence.
Future directions
The analyses presented in this report obviously do not exhaust the possibilities that this stimulus set offers. Future
work should investigate (1) low-level visual properties of
the OASIS images in order to enable researchers to control
for such properties when selecting subsets of images for
inclusion in a particular study; (2) ratings of the OASIS
images based on alternative conceptualizations of affect, including a third dimension (dominance or control) and discrete emotional labels, as well as additional dimensions such
as distinctiveness and memorability; (3) the validity and reliability of OASIS across cultural contexts and social

466

groups; and (4) affective responses to the OASIS images
that go beyond self-reported subjective ratings.
First, even though valence and arousal are uncorrelated
with low-level visual properties across the entire IAPS stimulus set, it has been shown that specific subsets of images can
systematically differ from each other in terms of spatial frequencies—that is, in the level of visual detail present in a
stimulus per visual angle (Delplanque, N’diaye, Scherer, &
Grandjean, 2007). Therefore, to be able to eliminate the effects
of this low-level confound on neural processing, spatialfrequency norms should be created for the OASIS images.
Such norms would allow researchers to control for any possible differences in terms of this property across subsets of images selected for use in a particular study.
Second, affective responses need not be conceptualized as
points in a two-dimensional space. Future work should investigate where the OASIS images are located in a threedimensional space of affect that includes a third dimension,
such as dominance or control (Fontaine, Scherer, Roesch, &
Ellsworth, 2007). Moreover, not all negative images are created equal. The behavioral and neural responses to negative
stimuli differ, depending on whether they are perceived as
immediately threatening to the individual or as merely being
negative and nonthreatening (Kveraga et al., 2015).
Importantly, affect can also be conceptualized as a set of discrete states rather than as dimensional (Barrett, 1998; Ekman,
1992; Izard, 1992), and, similarly to the IAPS images
(Libkuman, Otani, Kern, Viger, & Novak, 2007; Mikels
et al., 2005), the images included in the OASIS dataset could
also be rated using discrete emotion labels rather than two- or
three-dimensional scales. Furthermore, even though the
OASIS images were selected to represent various segments
of circumplex space, they are subject to variation on other, not
necessarily affective, dimensions, such as consequentiality,
memorability, meaningfulness, and familiarity. In some studies, researchers may want to control for these variables,
whereas in other studies they may want to systematically
probe their effects on other variables. Therefore, it would be
desirable to have an additional set of norms on these properties
of the OASIS images (for relevant ratings of the IAPS images,
see Libkuman et al., 2007).
Third, studies conducted with samples from such varied
societies as Bosnia (Drace, Efendic, Kusturica, & Landzo,
2013), Brazil (Lasaitis, Ribeiro, & Bueno, 2008), Chile
(Dufey, Fernandez, & Mayol, 2011), Hungary (Deák,
Csenki, & Révész, 2010), and India (Lohani, Gupta, &
Srinivasan, 2013) have revealed major similarities, but also
subtle cultural differences, in terms of the valence and arousal
ratings assigned to IAPS images. Therefore, future studies
should verify the cross-cultural validity of OASIS.
Moreover, even though in the present study we did not find
any strong age effects, future work involving larger-scale samples of older adults or non-self-report measures might reveal

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

age-related differences in the processing of affectively relevant images included in OASIS (Grühn & Scheibe, 2008;
Moriguchi et al., 2011).
Fourth, social desirability (Crowne & Marlowe, 1960;
Paulhus, 1984) and lack of introspective access to the
contents of one’s mind (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977) can distort responses on self-report measures. Thus, affective responses to the OASIS images should also be measured
using less controlled and more automatic implicit measures (Banaji, 2001), psychophysiological reactions
(Cacioppo, Berntson, Larsen, Poehlmann, & Ito, 2000),
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (Moriguchi
et al., 2011; Weierich, Wright, Negreira, Dickerson, &
Barrett, 2010). At the same time, it should be noted that
a reasonably stable relationship has been observed between psychophysiological responses such as heart rate,
skin conductance, facial electromyography, and the startle
reflex, on the one hand, and subjective affective ratings of
IAPS images, on the other (Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert,
1990). We have no reason to suspect that this would be
otherwise with the OASIS images.
Researchers from laboratories around the world are invited to contribute to the effort of norming the OASIS
images. As we discussed above, such studies might (1)
address further perceptual, cognitive, or affective dimensions not included in the present norming study; (2) use a
range of novel samples (e.g., non-American samples or
samples from specific social or demographic groups); or
(3) use tools other than self-report, such as the methods
offered by psychophysiology or neuroimaging. Such additional ratings will be included in the OASIS dataset and
made widely available to researchers if the ratings are sent
to oasis@fas.harvard.edu.
Usage
The OASIS stimulus set, containing 900 color images at a
size of 500 × 400 pixels, is available at www.
benedekkurdi.com/#oasis or https://db.tt/yYTZYCga. The
images can be downloaded, used, and modified free of
charge for research purposes. Along with the images, we
provide an accompanying data file listing the unique
identifier, theme, category, source, valence mean, valence
standard deviation, valence sample size, arousal mean,
arousal standard deviation, and arousal sample size for
each image. Because—at least for some image
categories—we found considerable gender differences in
terms of valence, and especially arousal, ratings, the
same information is also provided broken down by
gender in a separate data file.
At the first URL, we also offer an online tool that
displays an interactive scatterplot of the valence and
arousal ratings, broken down by image category. The tool

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

lets users restrict the scatterplot to one or more image
categories (e.g., only objects, or people and animals).
Furthermore, when the user clicks on a point in the
scatterplot, the tool displays a thumbnail of the corresponding image, along with its unique identifier and its
valence (mean and standard deviation) and arousal (mean
and standard deviation) ratings. On the basis of the unique
identifier displayed by the tool, the user can easily find
the image in the downloaded stimulus set and include it in
a research study.

Conclusion
In this article, we have introduced OASIS, an open-access
online stimulus set containing color images normed on two
affective dimensions, valence and arousal. OASIS offers
four distinct advantages. First, it contains a large number
of images spanning a wealth of different themes that cover
much of circumplex space (including mid- to high-arousal
images that are neutral on the valence dimension) and, unlike the images from IAPS, have been assigned to four broad
categories with large numbers of stimuli in each. Second,
because the OASIS ratings were obtained in 2015 from a
diverse sample of American adults, rather than an under-

467

graduate sample, they offer a valid reflection of selfreported contemporary assessments of valence and arousal.
Each image was rated by a relatively high number of participants (ranging from 101 to 108), and valence and arousal
remained unconfounded because each participant provided
ratings on only one dimension. Third, unencumbered by
the copyright restrictions that apply to similar stimulus sets,
such as the IAPS, the OASIS images allow for free reuse
and modification. Thus, they may be used freely in both
online and offline research studies. Finally, at www.
benedekkurdi.com/#oasis we offer an online tool that
enables users to freely download the OASIS images along
with their normative valence and arousal ratings, and to
interactively explore them by category and by valence and
arousal ratings. Our hope is that the OASIS stimulus set will
prove to be a useful resource for researchers studying any
aspect of affective responding in research studies conducted
over the Internet or in the lab.
Author note The research reported in this article was supported by a
grant from the Restricted Funds at the Department of Psychology,
Harvard University, to B.K., and by a seed grant from Harvard
University to M.R.B. We thank Lisa Feldman Barrett and Sa-kiera
Hudson for their insightful comments on earlier versions of the manuscript, Mark Thornton for statistical advice, and Preethi Raju for her
assistance with the stimulus set and manuscript.

Appendix 1

Table 1

Image-focused instructions

Screen

Valence

Screen 1

Pictures communicate. They depict people, objects, and scenes. In this study, we are interested in how various pictures make people feel.
As you answer, please remember:
There are no right or wrong answers. We are interested in your individual opinion. Please do not take too long over any picture. Your first
response is as good as any.
We will ask you to rate a series of pictures in terms of the amount
We will ask you to rate a series of pictures in terms of how
of emotion that they evoke. In other words, we would like to
positive or negative they are.
know how much emotional intensity the picture creates;
If the picture represents something good or positive, please use
whether the picture captures something good or bad doesn’t
the right side of the scale to mark your answer. Positive images
matter. We are interested only in the degree of excitement,
are those that represent things that make us happy, satisfied,
energy, or intensity of feeling it represents.
competent, proud, contented, delighted, and so on. It doesn’t
Use the right side of the scale to mark your answer if the picture
matter what the specific picture is about, as long as it represents
represents something that is strongly emotional. The words that
something positive or good.
we might use to describe the emotional state that the picture
If the picture represents something bad or negative, please use the
creates are aroused, alert, activated, charged, or energized.
left side of the scale to mark your answer. Negative images are
Use the left side of the scale to mark your answer if the picture
those that represent things that make us unhappy, upset,
represents something that is not strongly emotional. The
irritated, angry, sad, depressed, and so on. It doesn’t matter
words that we might use to describe the emotional state
what the specific picture is about, as long as it is something
that the picture creates are unaroused, slow, still, denegative or bad.
energized, calm, or peaceful.
Use the middle of the scale to indicate that the picture makes you
Use the middle of the scale to indicate an image that is moderately
feel neutral, that is, that you think that the picture is neither
arousing or halfway through the two extremes.
positive nor negative.

Screen 2

Arousal

468

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

Table 1 (continued)
Screen

Valence

Arousal

Please use the full range of the scale to make your responses
rather than relying on only a few points.

Please use the full range of the scale to make your responses
rather than relying on only a few points.
When making your ratings, you need to forget about whether the
picture is about something positive or negative, good or bad.
Instead, we ask you to rate the picture only in terms of the
emotional intensity that it evokes.
For instance, you might have two pictures—one depicting an athlete
winning a gold medal (something good) and another depicting an
athlete getting injured and losing the race (something bad). You
can give both images the same rating because they are both
creating a similar level of emotion, even though the feelings are
not the same. Your answers should be based only on how much
emotional intensity the picture captures.

Screen 3

Appendix 2

Table 2

Internal state-focused instructions

Screen

Valence

Screen 1

Pictures communicate. They depict people, objects, and scenes. In this study, we are interested in how various pictures make people feel.
As you answer, please remember:
There are no right or wrong answers. We are interested in your individual opinion. Please do not take too long over any picture. Your first
response is as good as any.
We will ask you to rate a series of pictures in terms of how excited
We will ask you to rate a series of pictures in terms of how
or aroused they make you feel. In other words, we would like
positive or negative they make you feel.
to know how intense the feeling is that the picture evokes;
If the picture creates a positive feeling, please use the right side of
whether it is good or bad doesn’t matter.
the scale to mark your answer. Positive feelings include feeling
Use the right side of the scale to mark your answer if the picture
happy, satisfied, competent, proud, contented, delighted, and
makes you feel emotionally aroused, alert, activated, charged,
so on. It doesn’t matter what the specific feeling is, as long as it
or energized.
is something positive.
Use the left side of the scale to mark your answer if the picture
If the picture creates a negative feeling, please use the left side of
makes you feel no emotional arousal at all, that is, if it makes
the scale to mark your answer. Negative feelings include
you feel unaroused, slow, still, de-energized, calm, or peaceful.
feeling unhappy, upset, irritated, angry, sad, depressed, and so
Use the middle of the scale to indicate that you are moderately
on. It doesn’t matter what the specific feeling is, as long as it is
aroused, that is, halfway through the two extremes.
something negative.
Please use the full range of the scale to make your responses
Use the middle of the scale to indicate that the picture makes you
rather than relying on only a few points.
feel neutral, that is, neither positive nor negative.
Please use the full range of the scale to make your responses
rather than relying on only a few points.
When making your ratings, you need to forget about whether the
picture makes you feel good or bad. We ask you to rate the
picture only in terms of emotional intensity and not in terms of
goodness or badness.
For instance, you might have two pictures—one depicting an
athlete winning a gold medal (something good) and another
depicting an athlete getting injured and losing the race
(something bad). You can give both images the same rating
because they are both creating a similar level of emotion, even
though the feelings are not the same. Your answers should be
based only on how much emotional intensity the picture creates.

Screen 2

Screen 3

Arousal

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

References
Altman, D. G., & Royston, P. (2006). The cost of dichotomising continuous variables. BMJ, 332, 1080. doi:10.1136/bmj.332.7549.1080
Baglioni, C., Lombardo, C., Bux, E., Hansen, S., Salveta, C., Biello,
S., … Espie, C. A. (2010). Psychophysiological reactivity to
sleep-related emotional stimuli in primary insomnia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 48, 467–475. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2010.
01.008
Banaji, M. R. (2001). Implicit attitudes can be measured. In H. L.
Roediger III, J. S. Nairne, & I. Neath (Eds.), The nature of remembering: Essays in honor of Robert G. Crowder (pp. 117–149).
Washington: American Psychological Association.
Barrett, L. F. (1998). Discrete emotions or dimensions? The role of valence focus and arousal focus. Cognition & Emotion, 12, 579–599.
doi:10.1080/026999398379574
Bellezza, F. S., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (1986). Words high
and low in pleasantness as rated by male and female college students. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 18,
299–303. doi:10.3758/BF03204403
Berinsky, A. J., Huber, G. A., & Lenz, G. S. (2012). Evaluating online
labor markets for experimental research: Amazon.com’s Mechanical
Turk. Political Analysis, 20, 351–368. doi:10.1093/pan/mpr057
Bishop, G. F., Oldendick, R. W., & Tuchfarber, A. J. (1984). Interest in
political campaigns: The influence of question order and electoral
context. Political Behavior, 6, 159–169. doi:10.1007/BF01207760
Bradley, M. M., Codispoti, M., Sabatinelli, D., & Lang, P. J. (2001).
Emotion and motivation II: Sex differences in picture processing.
Emotion, 1, 300–319. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.1.3.300
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1994). Measuring emotion: The SelfAssessment Manikin and the semantic differential. Journal of
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 25, 49–59. doi:
10.1016/0005-7916(94)90063-9
Buchanan, T., Johnson, J. A., & Goldberg, L. R. (2005). Implementing a
Five-Factor Personality Inventory for use on the Internet. European
Journal of Psychological Assessment, 21, 115–127. doi:10.1027/
1015-5759.21.2.115
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality,
data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 3–5. doi:10.1177/
1745691610393980
Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Larsen, J. T., Poehlmann, K. M., & Ito,
T. A. (2000). The psychophysiology of emotion. In M. Lewis & J.
M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 173–
191). New York: Guilford Press.
Cohen, N., Henik, A., & Mor, N. (2011). Can emotion modulate
attention? Evidence for reciprocal links in the attentional network test. Experimental Psychology, 58, 171–179. doi:10.1027/
1618-3169/a000083
Crowne, D. P., & Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability
independent of psychopathology. Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 24, 349–354. doi:10.1037/h0047358
Dan-Glauser, E. S., & Scherer, K. R. (2011). The Geneva Affective
Picture Database (GAPED): A new 730-picture database focusing
on valence and normative significance. Behavior Research Methods,
43, 468–477. doi:10.3758/s13428-011-0064-1
Deák, A., Csenki, L., & Révész, G. (2010). Hungarian ratings for the
International Affective Picture System (IAPS): A cross-cultural
comparison. Empirical Text and Culture Research, 4, 90–101.
Delplanque, S., N’diaye, K., Scherer, K., & Grandjean, D. (2007). Spatial
frequencies or emotional effects? Journal of Neuroscience Methods,
165, 144–150. doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2007.05.030

469
Drace, S., Efendic, E., Kusturica, M., & Landzo, L. (2013). Cross-cultural
validation of the BInternational Affective Picture System^ (IAPS) on
a sample from Bosnia and Herzegovina. Psihologija, 46, 17–26. doi:
10.2298/PSI1301017D
Dufey, M., Fernandez, A. M., & Mayol, R. (2011). Adding support to
cross-cultural emotional assessment: Validation of the International
Affective Picture System in a Chilean sample. Universitas
Psychologica, 10, 521–533.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition &
Emotion, 6, 169–200. doi:10.1080/02699939208411068
Fontaine, J. R. J., Scherer, K. R., Roesch, E. B., & Ellsworth, P. C. (2007).
The world of emotions is not two-dimensional. Psychological
Science, 18, 1050–1057. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.02024.x
Frost, R. O., Tolin, D. F., Steketee, G., Fitch, K. E., & Selbo-Bruns, A.
(2009). Excessive acquisition in hoarding. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 23, 632–639. doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2009.01.013
Furnham, A. (1986). Response bias, social desirability and dissimulation.
Personality and Individual Differences, 7(3), 385–400. doi:10.1016/
0191-8869(86)90014-0
Grühn, D., & Scheibe, S. (2008). Age-related differences in valence
and arousal ratings of pictures from the International Affective
Picture System (IAPS): Do ratings become more extreme with
age? Behavior Research Methods, 40, 512–521. doi:10.3758/
BRM.40.2.512
Hajcak, G., & Dennis, T. A. (2009). Brain potentials during affective
picture processing in children. Biological Psychology, 80, 333–
338. doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2008.11.006
Hodes, R. L., Cook, E. W., & Lang, P. J. (1985). Individual differences in autonomic response: Conditioned association or conditioned fear? Psychophysiology, 22, 545–560. doi:10.1111/j.
1469-8986.1985.tb01649.x
Huber, G. A., Hill, S. J., & Lenz, G. S. (2012). Sources of bias in retrospective decision making: Experimental evidence on voters’ limitations in controlling incumbents. The American Political Science
Review, 106, 720–741. doi:10.1017/S0003055412000391
Izard, C. E. (1992). Basic emotions, relations among emotions, and emotion–cognition relations. Psychological Review, 99, 561–565. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.99.3.561
Krantz, J. H. (2015). Psychological research on the net [Webpage].
Retrieved July 22, 2015, from http://psych.hanover.edu/Research/
exponnet.html
Kraut, R. E., Olson, J. S., Banaji, M. R., Bruckman, A. S., Cohen, J. M.,
& Couper, M. P. (2004). Psychological research online: Report of
the Board of Scientific Affairs’ Advisory Group on the Conduct of
Research on the Internet. American Psychologist, 59, 105–117. doi:
10.1037/0003-066X.59.2.105
Kuppens, P., Tuerlinckx, F., Russell, J. A., & Barrett, L. F. (2013). The
relation between valence and arousal in subjective experience.
Psychological Bulletin, 139, 917–940. doi:10.1037/a0030811
Kveraga, K., Boshyan, J., Adams, R. B., Jr., Mote, J., Betz, N., Ward, N.,
… Barrett, L. F. (2015). If it bleeds, it leads: Separating threat from
mere negativity. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 10,
28–35. doi:10.1093/scan/nsu007
Lang, P. J. (1995). The emotion probe: Studies of motivation and
attention. American Psychologist, 50, 372–385. doi:10.1037/
0003-066X.50.5.372
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1990). Emotion, attention,
and the startle reflex. Psychological Review, 97, 377–395. doi:10.
1037/0033-295X.97.3.377
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (2008). International
Affective Picture System (IAPS): Affective ratings of pictures and
instruction manual (Technical Report A-8). Gainesville: University
of Florida, Center for Research in Psychophysiology.

470
Lasaitis, C., Ribeiro, R. L., & Bueno, O. F. A. (2008). Brazilian norms for
the International Affective Picture System (IAPS): Comparison of
the affective ratings for new stimuli between Brazilian and NorthAmerican subjects. Jornal Brasileiro de Psiquiatria, 57, 270–275.
doi:10.1590/S0047-20852008000400008
Lau, R. R., Sears, D. O., & Jessor, T. (1990). Fact or artifact revisited:
Survey instrument effects and pocketbook politics. Political
Behavior, 12, 217–242. doi:10.1007/BF00992334
Libkuman, T. M., Otani, H., Kern, R., Viger, S. G., & Novak, N. (2007).
Multidimensional normative ratings for the International Affective
Picture System. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 326–334. doi:10.
3758/BF03193164
Lohani, M., Gupta, R., & Srinivasan, N. (2013). Cross-cultural evaluation of the International Affective Picture System on an
Indian sample. Psychological Studies, 58, 233–241. doi:10.
1007/s12646-013-0196-8
Lundqvist, D., Flykt, A., & Öhman, A. (1998). The Karolinska
Directed Emotional Faces (KDEF) [CD ROM]. Solna,
Sweden: Karolinska Institutet, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience, Psychology section.
MacCallum, R. C., Zhang, S., Preacher, K. J., & Rucker, D. D. (2002). On
the practice of dichotomization of quantitative variables.
Psychological Methods, 7, 19–40. doi:10.1037/1082-989X.7.1.19
Mason, W., & Suri, S. (2012). Conducting behavioral research on
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Behavior Research Methods, 44, 1–
23. doi:10.3758/s13428-011-0124-6
Mikels, J. A., Fredrickson, B. L., Larkin, G. R., Lindberg, C. M., Maglio,
S. J., & Reuter-Lorenz, P. A. (2005). Emotional category data on
images from the international affective picture system. Behavior
Research Methods, 37, 626–630. doi:10.3758/BF03192732
Moll, J., Zahn, R., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Krueger, F., & Grafman, J.
(2005). Opinion: The neural basis of human moral cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 799–809. doi:10.1038/nrn1768
Moriguchi, Y., Negreira, A., Weierich, M., Dautoff, R., Dickerson, B. C.,
Wright, C. I., & Barrett, L. F. (2011). Differential hemodynamic
response in affective circuitry with aging: An fMRI study of novelty,
valence, and arousal. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 1027–
1041. doi:10.1162/jocn.2010.21527
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know:
Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84, 231–
259. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.84.3.231
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (2002). Harvesting
implicit group attitudes and beliefs from a demonstration web site.
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 6, 101–115. doi:
10.1037/1089-2699.6.1.101
Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., & Ipeirotis, P. (2010). Running experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Judgment and Decision
Making, 5, 411–419.
Paulhus, D. L. (1984). Two-component models of socially desirable
responding. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46,
598–609. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.46.3.598

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470
Payne, B. K., Cheng, C. M., Govorun, O., & Stewart, B. D. (2005). An
inkblot for attitudes: Affect misattribution as implicit measurement.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 277–293. doi:10.
1037/0022-3514.89.3.277
Pequegnat, W., Rosser, B. R. S., Bowen, A. M., Bull, S. S., DiClemente,
R. J., Bockting, W. O., … Zimmerman, R. (2007). Conducting
Internet-based HIV/STD prevention survey research:
Considerations in design and evaluation. AIDS and Behavior, 11,
505–521. doi:10.1007/s10461-006-9172-9
Peterson, C., Park, N., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Orientations to
happiness and life satisfaction: The full life versus the empty
life. Journal of Happiness Studies, 6, 25–41. doi:10.1007/
s10902-004-1278-z
Quigley, K. S., Lindquist, K. A., & Barrett, L. F. (2014). Inducing and
measuring emotion and affect: Tips, tricks, and secrets. In H. T. Reis
& C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and
personality psychology (pp. 220–252). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Rand, D. G. (2012). The promise of Mechanical Turk How online labor
markets can help theorists run behavioral experiments. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 299, 172–179. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.03.004
Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1161–1178. doi:10.
1037/h0077714
Sabatinelli, D., Flaisch, T., Bradley, M. M., Fitzsimmons, J. R., & Lang,
P. J. (2004). Affective picture perception: Gender differences in
visual cortex? NeuroReport, 15, 1109–1112.
Schuman, H., Kalton, G., & Ludwig, J. (1983). Context and contiguity in survey questionnaires. Public Opinion Quarterly,
47, 112–115.
Seo, M.-G., & Barrett, L. F. (2007). Being emotional during decision making—Good or bad? An empirical investigation.
Academy of Management Journal, 50, 923–940. doi:10.5465/
AMJ.2007.26279217
Weierich, M. R., Wright, C. I., Negreira, A., Dickerson, B. C., &
Barrett, L. F. (2010). Novelty as a dimension in the affective
brain. NeuroImage, 49, 2871–2878. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2009.09.047
Wessa, M., & Flor, H. (2007). Failure of extinction of fear responses in
posttraumatic stress disorder: Evidence from second-order conditioning. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 1684–1692. doi:10.
1176/appi.ajp.2007.07030525
Wilcox, N., & Wlezien, C. (1993). The contamination of responses to
survey items: Economic perceptions and political judgments.
Political Analysis, 5, 181–213.
Wrase, J., Klein, S., Gruesser, S. M., Hermann, D., Flor, H., Mann,
K., … Heinz, A. (2003). Gender differences in the processing of
standardized emotional visual stimuli in humans: A functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. Neuroscience Letters, 348,
41–45.

