Method
Participants
The participants were recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to Brate images of everyday objects
and scenes^ in exchange for $0.75. MTurk offers a participant
pool that is more diverse than undergraduate samples
(Berinsky et al., 2012; Buhrmester et al., 2011), such as the
sample that provided normative ratings for the IAPS images
(Lang et al., 2008). Moreover, it has been demonstrated repeatedly that studies conducted via MTurk offer valid and
reliable data whose quality is comparable to that of data collected in lab studies (Buhrmester et al., 2011; Mason & Suri,
2012; Paolacci et al., 2010; Rand, 2012). To make sure that
participants were sufficiently attentive and motivated, we restricted participation to workers with an approval rate of at
least 90 % on previous human intelligence tasks (HITs) completed on MTurk, and at least 50 HITs completed. Moreover,
to prevent intercultural differences in terms of valence and
arousal judgments or response styles from contaminating the
results, the HIT was displayed only to workers from the
United States. Potential participants received a disclaimer that
they might find some of the images displayed in the study
disturbing, due to Bsexually explicit, violent, or traumatic^
content. The original target number for participants was 800;
however, because some participants failed to submit their HIT
on Amazon MTurk after completing the study, we ended up
with usable data from 822 participants. On average, it took
participants 25.13 min (SD = 6.68) to complete the study.
The participants exhibited considerable variability in terms
of age, gender, geographic location, and socioeconomic background. Participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 74 years, with a
mean of 36.63 years (SD = 11.91). With 420 female and 398
male participants, the gender distribution was balanced.
Participants’ ideological self-placement, race, highest level
of education, and household income also varied considerably

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

(see Fig. 1), although, relative to the national average, liberal,
White, highly educated, and high-income participants were
overrepresented in our sample, as they are in most online
research studies (Berinsky et al., 2012). Detailed demographic
data have not been reported for the participants who rated the
original IAPS images. However, given that the IAPS images
were rated exclusively by introductory psychology students
(Lang et al., 2008), one can reasonably assume that the sample
used in the present study was considerably more diverse in
terms of age and socioeconomic background.
Materials
The 900 images included in the study were obtained from
a variety of online sources, most notably Pixabay (https://
pixabay.com/en/; N = 646) and Wikipedia (https://www.
wikipedia.org; N = 172). The images were found using
Google Images (https://images.google.com). We
collected a broad range of images that we expected to
cover the largest possible area in circumplex space. The
image search was restricted to images labeled as being
available for reuse with modification, thus ensuring that
the images could be edited and redistributed without any
restrictions and free of charge. We standardized the size of
the images by scaling and/or cropping them to 500 ×
400 pixels. The images were then randomly assigned to
four lists containing 225 images each.
Prior to the study, each image was placed into one of four
mutually exclusive categories—animals, objects, people, and
scenes. The images in the animal category (N = 134) depict
various animals, including dogs, snakes, insects, birds, spiders, sharks, lions, monkeys, and cats. The images in the
objects category (N = 200) depict a wide range of objects,
including human-made objects such as fences, jewelry, cars,
bottles, and balls of yarn, and natural objects such as leaves,
rocks, pebbles, and flowers. The images in the people category (N = 346) depict humans alone, in dyads, and in groups
in various situations of daily life. The images in the scenes
category (N = 220) depict urban and rural spaces, as well as
weather phenomena such as lightning or earthquakes. It
should be noted that the category assignments were made
by the first and second authors and had no basis in empirical
measurement. They serve merely to facilitate the use of the
stimulus set.
Procedure
Prestudy We considered whether to instruct participants to
focus on the valence and intensity of each image or to ask
about the feelings that each image evoked in them. We
thus created two sets of instructions: image-focused instructions asking participants to indicate the level of valence or arousal intrinsic to each image, and internal

459

state-focused instructions asking participants to indicate
the level of valence and arousal that each image has
evoked in them2 (Quigley et al., 2014). To determine
whether these two sets of instructions led to different assessments, and if so, in what way, we conducted a
prestudy with 184 participants, also recruited from
Amazon MTurk.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
sets of instructions (see Appendixes 1 and 2) and to either
the valence or the arousal dimension. We tested the effects
of the instruction manipulation on the valence and arousal
ratings by fitting a mixed-effects linear regression to the
data, with random intercepts for images and participants,
and a fixed effect for instruction focus (image-focused vs.
internal state-focused). No significant effect of instruction
focus was found, t(90) = 0.789, p = .432, suggesting that
participants rated the images similarly irrespective of
whether they had been assigned to the image-focused or
the internal state-focused instruction condition. Therefore,
in the main study, we dropped this manipulation and used
only the image-focused instructions.
Main study The 900 images were randomly assigned to four
lists of 225 images each. Each list was tested in a separate
study. Four lists were created in order to prevent participant
fatigue. Using a mixed-effects model including random effects for participants and images and a fixed effect for list,
we found that ratings did not differ across the lists, χ2(3) =
1.01, p = .798. Therefore, all results are reported by collapsing
across lists. To avoid contamination between the two dimensions of valence and arousal (Bishop, Oldendick, &
Tuchfarber, 1984; Lau, Sears, & Jessor, 1990; Schuman,
Kalton, & Ludwig, 1983; Wilcox & Wlezien, 1993), each
participant was randomly assigned to rate the images on only
the valence or only the arousal dimension. First, participants
received a general description of the study (Screen 1) and
detailed instructions on the meaning of the dimension that
they would be asked to rate (Screen 2; for the full set of
instructions, see Appendix 1). We expected that the meaning
of the valence dimension might be more intuitively clear to
participants than the meaning of the arousal dimension. To
prevent the valence dimension from interfering with judgments of arousal, the participants in the arousal condition received an additional set of instructions (Screen 3) explaining
the difference between valence and arousal and the orthogonal
nature of the two dimensions.
After reading the instructions, participants were presented
with the 225 images in an individually randomized order and
were asked to rate the images using a 7-point Likert scale.
2
The IAPS is based on internal state-focused instructions. For instance,
the arousal instructions say, B[a]t one extreme of the scale you felt stimulated, excited, frenzied, jittery, wide-awake, aroused^ (Lang et al., 2008).

460

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

Fig. 1 Distributions of some key demographic variables (race, ideological self-placement, highest educational attainment, and annual household
income) in the sample

Even though the IAPS images were originally normed using a
so-called Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM; Hodes, Cook, &
Lang, 1985) rather than a verbal scale, it has been shown that,
at least for the valence and arousal dimensions assessed in the
present study, SAM and corresponding verbal scales are very
highly correlated (Bradley & Lang, 1994). Each image was
displayed in a size of 500 × 400 pixels on a separate screen,
and the rating scale was placed below the image. For the valence dimension, the word Valence was displayed above the
rating scale and the points of the scale were labeled as Very
negative, Moderately negative, Somewhat negative, Neutral,
Somewhat positive, Moderately positive, and Very positive.
For the arousal dimension, the word Arousal was displayed
above the rating scale and the points of the scale were labeled
as Very low, Moderately low, Somewhat low, Neither low nor
high, Somewhat high, Moderately high, and Very high.
Valence and arousal are technical terms; however, they
were used as labels because their meanings were clearly explained to participants in the instructions and we did not want
to impose any new, potentially misleading, labels on the
scales. After rating each image, participants clicked a button
to proceed to the next screen. The survey was set up to proceed in a forward only direction; that is, participants were not
allowed to return to previous screens.
After providing ratings for all 225 images, participants
were asked to complete a standard demographic questionnaire
including items on gender, age, ethnicity, race, ideological
self-placement, annual household income, highest educational
attainment, current ZIP code, and ZIP code where they had

lived longest. On the following screen, participants received a
6-digit code with which they were able to claim compensation
on Amazon MTurk. On the last screen of the study, participants were thanked and debriefed.

