Abstract We introduce the Open Affective Standardized
Image Set (OASIS), an open-access online stimulus set containing 900 color images depicting a broad spectrum of
themes, including humans, animals, objects, and scenes, along
with normative ratings on two affective dimensions—valence
(i.e., the degree of positive or negative affective response that
the image evokes) and arousal (i.e., the intensity of the affective response that the image evokes). The OASIS images were
collected from online sources, and valence and arousal ratings
were obtained in an online study (total N = 822). The valence
and arousal ratings covered much of the circumplex space and
were highly reliable and consistent across gender groups.
OASIS has four advantages: (a) the stimulus set contains a
large number of images in four categories; (b) the data were
collected in 2015, and thus OASIS features more current images and reflects more current ratings of valence and arousal
than do existing stimulus sets; (c) the OASIS database affords
users the ability to interactively explore images by category
and ratings; and, most critically, (d) OASIS allows for free use
of the images in online and offline research studies, as they are
not subject to the copyright restrictions that apply to the
International Affective Picture System. The OASIS images,
along with normative valence and arousal ratings, are available for download from www.benedekkurdi.com/#oasis or
https://db.tt/yYTZYCga.

* Mahzarin R. Banaji
mahzarin_banaji@harvard.edu

1

Department of Psychology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Keywords Affect ratings . Arousal ratings . Circumplex
model . Emotion . Images . Norms . Online research .
Open-access . Valence ratings
Images represent both the physical and social worlds. Using a
few thousand pixels, they can depict an unlimited array of
people, objects, and scenes and can evoke a range of affective
responses, such as happiness, excitement, contentment, sadness, anger, or disgust. Many studies in the behavioral and
brain sciences require images that elicit varied emotions associated with social and nonsocial phenomena (Quigley,
Lindquist, & Barrett, 2014). To facilitate such research, the
Center for the Study of Emotion and Attention developed
the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang,
Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008), an internationally available normative set of emotional stimuli. The latest version of the IAPS
contains 1,195 color photographs that have been assigned
normative ratings on three dimensions—valence, arousal,
and dominance.1 Since its inception, the IAPS has been widely used in psychological, psychophysiological, and neuroscience research covering a broad array of topics, including affective processing in children (Hajcak & Dennis, 2009), psychophysiological reactions to sleep-related images in insomnia (Baglioni et al., 2010), fear conditioning (Wessa & Flor,
2007), the emotional modulation of attention (Cohen, Henik,
& Mor, 2011), moral cognition (Moll, Zahn, de OliveiraSouza, Krueger, & Grafman, 2005), and implicit attitudes
(Payne, Cheng, Govorun, & Stewart, 2005). To date, several
thousand research studies have been published using IAPS
images, making the IAPS one of the most frequently used
stimulus sets in behavioral research today. Its contribution to
advancing research cannot be overstated.
1

Categorical affective ratings for the IAPS images are also available
(Mikels et al., 2005).

458

However, IAPS was produced in pre-Internet research
times, and as such the images are subject to copyright restrictions that prohibit their use in online research studies. In fact,
the copyright agreement accompanying the IAPS clearly stipulates that users are not allowed Bto place them [i.e., IAPS
images] on any internet or computer-accessible websites^
[sic]. Given the increased reliance on online samples in behavioral research, this restriction poses an unnecessary constraint
on research progress. The Internet has massively changed how
psychological research is being conducted, both by expanding
the range of phenomena under study and by providing new
and more robust tools for implementing projects. Data collection has become faster, less expensive, and more efficient,
because researchers can easily post research studies online
for data collection from large and diverse pools of participants
without geographic and other boundaries (Berinsky, Huber, &
Lenz, 2012; Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling, 2011; Kraut et
al., 2004; Mason & Suri, 2012; Paolacci, Chandler, &
Ipeirotis, 2010), with the exception of digital literacy. It is
hardly a surprise, then, that hundreds of behavioral studies
are being conducted online at any given time—a number that
increases daily (Krantz, 2015). For instance, Project Implicit’s
data collection and educational website on topics of implicit
group attitudes and beliefs (http://implicit.harvard.edu) has
been in use since 1998 and has gathered data from over 15
million tests. However, the issues addressed by online research
studies are not restricted to implicit social bias (Nosek, Banaji,
& Greenwald, 2002); they range from voters’ competence at
assessing incumbent politicians (Huber, Hill, & Lenz, 2012) to
life satisfaction (Peterson, Park, & Seligman, 2005), from
emotion in decision making (Seo & Barrett, 2007) to personality (Buchanan, Johnson, & Goldberg, 2005), and from compulsive hoarding (Frost, Tolin, Steketee, Fitch, & SelboBruns, 2009) to the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases
(Pequegnat et al., 2007).
As the volume and complexity of online research increases,
a greater number of behavioral researchers require access to
pretested images that vary in affective valence and intensity.
Although several general and specialized visual stimulus sets
are available to facilitate behavioral research on emotion, such
as the IAPS (Lang et al., 2008), the Karolinska Directed
Emotional Faces (Lundqvist, Flykt, & Öhman, 1998), and
the Geneva Affective Picture Database (GAPED; DanGlauser & Scherer, 2011), there is a lack of standardized,
open-access, and widely available stimulus sets with corresponding normative affective ratings. Therefore, as of now,
researchers conducting online studies are forced to create visual stimuli in an ad hoc manner, which is time-consuming,
inefficient, and limits the comparability and generalizability of
research findings.
The goal of the present project was to create an open-access
standardized stimulus set containing affective images,
which—similarly to the IAPS—includes a broad spectrum

Behav Res (2017) 49:457–470

of themes. We sought to create an independent novel stimulus
set containing high-quality contemporaneous images with the
broadest possible coverage of circumplex space, rather than
any direct content mapping to IAPS images. We collected 900
images depicting a wide range of categories, including
humans, animals, scenes, and objects, from open-access online sources, and recruited a diverse sample of participants for
a norming study to gauge their affective responses to the images. Although affective responses can be conceptualized and
measured in a number of different ways, we relied on the
circumplex model of affect (Russell, 1980) and collected
self-reported subjective ratings on valence (i.e., the positivity
or negativity of the affective response) and arousal (i.e., the
level of excitement that an observer experiences).

