Method
Participants
Participants were recruited through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to “rate images
of everyday objects and scenes” in exchange for $0.75. MTurk offers a more diverse participant
pool than undergraduate samples (Berinsky et al., 2012; Buhrmester et al., 2011), such as the
sample that provided normative ratings for IAPS images (Lang et al., 2008). Moreover, it has

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

6

been demonstrated repeatedly that studies conducted via MTurk offer valid and reliable data
whose quality is comparable to data collected in lab studies (Buhrmester et al., 2011; Mason &
Suri, 2012; Paolacci et al., 2010; Rand, 2012). In order to make sure that participants are sufficiently attentive and motivated, we restricted participation to workers with an approval rate of at
least 90 percent on previous human intelligence tasks (HITs) completed on MTurk and at least
50 HITs completed. Moreover, in order to prevent intercultural differences in terms of valence
and arousal judgments or response styles from contaminating the results, the HIT was displayed
only to workers from the United States. Potential participants received a disclaimer that they
might find some of the images displayed in the study disturbing due to “sexually explicit, violent, or traumatic” content. The original target number for participants was 800; however, because some participants failed to submit their HIT on Amazon MTurk after completing the study,
we ended up with usable data from 822 participants. On average, it took participants 25.13
minutes (SD = 6.68) to complete the study.
Participants exhibited considerable variability in terms of age, gender, geographic location, and socioeconomic background. Participants’ age ranged from 18 to 74 years, with a mean
of 36.63 years (SD = 11.91). With 420 female and 398 male participants, the gender distribution
was balanced. Participants’ ideological self-placement, race, highest level of education, and
household income also varied considerably (see Figure 1), although compared to the national average, Liberal, White, highly educated, and high-income participants were overrepresented in our
sample, as they are in most online research studies (Berinsky et al., 2012). Detailed demographic
data have not been reported for subjects who participated in rating IAPS images. However, given
that IAPS images were rated exclusively by introductory psychology students (Lang et al., 2008),

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

7

one can reasonably assume that the sample used in the present study was considerably more diverse in terms of age and socioeconomic background.
Materials
The 900 images included in the study were obtained from a variety of online sources,
most notably Pixabay (https://pixabay.com/en/; N = 646) and Wikipedia
(https://www.wikipedia.org; N = 172). The images were found using Google Images
(https://images.google.com). We collected a broad range of images that we expected to cover the
largest possible area in circumplex space. The image search was restricted to images labeled as
available for reuse with modification, thus ensuring that the images could be edited and redistributed without any restrictions and free of charge. We standardized the size of the images by
scaling and/or cropping them to 500×400 pixels. The images were then randomly assigned to 4
lists containing 225 images each.
Prior to the study, each image was placed into one of four mutually exclusive categories—animals, objects, people, and scenes. Images in the animal category (N = 134) depict various animals, including dogs, snakes, insects, birds, spiders, sharks, lions, monkeys, and cats. Images in the objects category (N = 200) depict a wide range of objects, including human-made objects such as fences, jewelry, cars, bottles, and balls of yarn, and natural objects such as leaves,
rocks, pebbles, and flowers. Images in the people category (N = 346) depict humans alone, in
dyads, and in groups in various situations of daily life. Images in the scenes category (N = 220)
depict urban and rural spaces, as well as weather phenomena such as lightning or earthquakes. It
should be noted that category assignments were made by the first and second authors and had no
basis in empirical measurement. They serve merely to facilitate the use of the stimulus set.
Procedure

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

8

Prestudy. We considered whether to instruct participants to focus on the valence and intensity of each image or to ask about the feelings that each image evoked in them. We thus created two sets of instructions: image-focused instructions asking participants to indicate the level of
valence or arousal intrinsic to each image and internal state-focused instructions asking participants to indicate the level of valence and arousal that each image has evoked in them2 (Quigley
et al., 2014). To determine whether these two sets of instructions led to different assessments and
if so in what way, we conducted a prestudy with 184 participants, also recruited from Amazon
MTurk.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two sets of instructions (see Appendix
A and B) and to either the valence or the arousal dimension. We tested the effect of the instruction manipulation on valence and arousal ratings by fitting a mixed-effects linear regression to
the data, with random intercepts for images and participants, and a fixed effect for instruction
focus (image-focused vs. internal state-focused). No significant effect of instruction focus was
found, t(90) = 0.789, p = .432, suggesting that participants rated the images similarly irrespective
of whether they had been assigned to the image-focused or the internal state-focused instruction
condition. Therefore, in the main study, we dropped this manipulation and used only the imagefocused instructions.
Main study. The 900 images were randomly assigned to 4 lists of 225 images each. Each
list was tested in a separate study. Four lists were created in order to prevent participant fatigue.
Using a mixed-effects model containing random effects for participants and images and a fixed
effect for list we found that ratings did not differ across lists, χ2(3) = 1.01, p = .798. Therefore,
all results are reported by collapsing across lists. In order to avoid contamination between the
2

IAPS uses internal state-focused instructions. For instance, the arousal instructions say, “[a]t one extreme of the
scale you felt stimulated, excited, frenzied, jittery, wide-awake, aroused” (Lang et al., 2008).

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

9

two dimensions of valence and arousal (Bishop, Oldendick, & Tuchfarber, 1984; Lau, Sears, &
Jessor, 1990; Schuman, Kalton, & Ludwig, 1983; Wilcox & Wlezien, 1993), each participant
was randomly assigned to rate the images on only the valence dimension or only the arousal dimension. First, participants received a general description of the study (screen 1) and detailed
instructions on the meaning of the dimension that they would be asked to rate (screen 2; for the
full set of instructions see Appendix A). We expected that the meaning of the valence dimension
might be more intuitively clear to participants than the meaning of the arousal dimension. In order to prevent the valence dimension from interfering with judgments of arousal, participants in
the arousal condition received an additional set of instructions (screen 3) explaining the difference between valence and arousal and the orthogonal nature of the two dimensions.
After reading the instructions, participants were presented with the 225 images in an individually randomized order and were asked to rate the images using a 7-point Likert scale. Even
though IAPS images were originally normed using a so-called self-assessment manikin (SAM;
Hodes, Cook, & Lang, 1985) rather than a verbal scale, it has been shown that, at least for the
valence and arousal dimensions assessed in the present study, SAM and corresponding verbal
scales are very highly correlated (Bradley & Lang, 1994). Each image was displayed in a size of
500×400 pixels on a separate screen. The rating scale was placed below the image. For the valence dimension, the word “Valence” was displayed above the rating scale and the points of the
scale were labeled as “Very negative,” “Moderately negative,” “Somewhat negative,” “Neutral,”
“Somewhat positive,” “Moderately positive,” and “Very positive.” For the arousal dimension,
the word “Arousal” was displayed above the rating scale and the points of the scale were labeled
as “Very low,” “Moderately low,” “Somewhat low,” “Neither low nor high,” “Somewhat high,”
“Moderately high,” and “Very high.”

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

10

Valence and arousal are technical terms; however, they were used as labels because their
meanings were clearly explained to participants in the instructions and we did not want to impose any new, potentially misleading, labels on the scales. After rating each image, participants
clicked a button to proceed to the next screen. The survey was set up to proceed in a forward only direction, i.e., participants were not allowed to return to previous screens.
After providing ratings for all 225 images, participants were asked to complete a standard
demographic questionnaire including items on gender, age, ethnicity, race, ideological selfplacement, annual household income, highest educational attainment, current ZIP code, and ZIP
code where they had lived longest. On the following screen, participants received a 6-digit code
with which they were able to claim compensation on Amazon MTurk. On the last screen of the
study, participants were thanked and debriefed.
