Abstract
We introduce the Open Affective Standardized Image Set (OASIS), an open-access online stimulus set containing 900 color images depicting a broad spectrum of themes, including humans,
animals, objects, and scenes along with normative ratings on two affective dimensions—valence
(i.e., the degree of positive or negative affective response that the image evokes) and arousal
(i.e., the intensity of affective response that the image evokes). OASIS images were collected
from online sources and valence and arousal ratings were obtained in an online study (total N =
822). Valence and arousal ratings covered much of the circumplex space, and were highly reliable and consistent across gender groups. OASIS has four advantages: (a) the stimulus set contains a large number of images in four categories; (b) data were collected in 2015, thus OASIS
features more current images and reflects more current ratings of valence and arousal than existing stimulus sets; (c) the OASIS database affords users the ability to interactively explore images
by category and ratings; and, most critically, (d) OASIS allows for the free use of images in
online and offline research studies as they are not subject to the copyright restrictions that apply
to the International Affective Picture System (IAPS). OASIS images, along with normative valence and arousal ratings, are available for download from http://www.benedekkurdi.com/#oasis
or https://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~banaji/XXX.
Keywords: affect ratings, arousal ratings, circumplex model, emotion, images, norms, online research, open-access, valence ratings

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

3

Introducing the Open Affective Standardized Image Set (OASIS)
Images represent the physical and social world. Using a few thousand pixels they can depict an unlimited array of people, objects, and scenes and evoke a range of affective responses
such as happiness, excitement, contentment, sadness, anger, or disgust. Many studies in the behavioral and brain sciences require images to elicit varied emotions associated with social and
nonsocial phenomena (Quigley, Lindquist, & Barrett, 2014). In order to facilitate such research,
the Center for the Study of Emotion & Attention developed the International Affective Picture
System (IAPS; Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008), an internationally available normative set of
emotional stimuli. The latest version of the IAPS contains 1195 color photographs that have been
assigned normative ratings on three dimensions—valence, arousal, and dominance1. Since its
inception, the IAPS has been widely used in psychological, psychophysiological, and neuroscience research covering a broad array of topics including affective processing in children (Hajcak
& Dennis, 2009), psychophysiological reactions to sleep-related images in insomnia (Baglioni et
al., 2010), fear conditioning (Wessa & Flor, 2007), the emotional modulation of attention (Cohen, Henik, & Mor, 2011), moral cognition (Moll, Zahn, de Oliveira-Souza, Krueger, & Grafman, 2005), and implicit attitudes (Payne, Cheng, Govorun, & Stewart, 2005). To date several
thousand research studies have been published using IAPS images, making the IAPS one of the
most frequently used stimulus sets in behavioral research today. Its contribution to advancing
research cannot be overstated.
However, IAPS were produced in pre-Internet research times and as such the images are
subject to copyright restrictions that prohibit their usage in online research studies. In fact the
copyright agreement accompanying the IAPS clearly stipulates that users are not allowed “to
1

Categorical affective ratings for IAPS images are also available (Mikels et al., 2005).

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

4

place them [i.e., IAPS images] on any internet or computer-accessible websites [sic].” Given the
increased reliance on online samples in behavioral research, this restriction poses an unnecessary
constraint on research progress. The Internet has massively changed how psychological research
is being conducted, both by expanding the range of phenomena under study and by providing
new and more robust tools for implementing projects. Data collection has become faster, less expensive, and more efficient, as researchers can easily post research studies online for data collection from large and diverse pools of participants without geographic and other boundaries (Berinsky, Huber, & Lenz, 2012; Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling, 2011; Kraut et al., 2004; Mason &
Suri, 2012; Paolacci, Chandler, & Ipeirotis, 2010), with the exception of digital literacy. It is
hardly a surprise, then, that hundreds of behavioral studies are being conducted online at any
given time—a number which increases daily (Krantz, 2015). For instance, Project Implicit’s data
collection and educational website on topics of implicit group attitudes and beliefs
(http://implicit.harvard.edu) has been in use since 1998 and has gathered data from over 15 million tests. However, the issues addressed by online research studies are not restricted to implicit
social bias (Nosek, Banaji, & Greenwald, 2002); they range from voters’ competence in assessing incumbent politicians (Huber, Hill, & Lenz, 2012) to life satisfaction (Peterson, Park, &
Seligman, 2005), from emotion in decision making (Seo & Barrett, 2007) to personality (Buchanan, Johnson, & Goldberg, 2005), and from compulsive hoarding (Frost, Tolin, Steketee,
Fitch, & Selbo-Bruns, 2009) to the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases (Pequegnat et al.,
2006).
As the volume and complexity of online research increases, a greater number of behavioral researchers require access to pretested images that vary in affective valence and intensity.
Although there are several general and specialized visual stimulus sets that facilitate behavioral

Running head: OPEN AFFECTIVE STANDARDIZED IMAGE SET

5

research on emotion, such as the IAPS (Lang et al., 2008), the Karolinska Directed Emotional
Faces (Lundqvist, Flykt, & Öhman, 1998), and the Geneva Affective Picture Database (GAPED;
Dan-Glauser & Scherer, 2011), there is a lack of standardized, open-access, and widely available
stimulus sets with corresponding normative affective ratings. Therefore, as of now, researchers
conducting online studies are forced to create visual stimuli in an ad hoc manner, which is timeconsuming, inefficient, and limits the comparability and generalizability of research findings.
The goal of the present project was to create an open-access standardized stimulus set
containing affective images, which—similarly to the IAPS—includes a broad spectrum of
themes. We sought to create an independent novel stimulus set containing high-quality contemporaneous images with the broadest possible coverage of circumplex space rather than any direct
content mapping to IAPS images. We collected 900 images depicting a wide range of categories,
including humans, animals, scenes, and objects, from open-access online sources and recruited a
diverse sample of participants for a norming study to gauge affective responses to the images.
Although affective responses can be conceptualized and measured in a number of different ways,
we relied on the circumplex model of affect (Russell, 1980) and collected self-reported subjective ratings on valence (i.e., the positivity or negativity of the affective response) and arousal
(i.e., the level of excitement that one experiences).
